- Testing Web Controllers is easy.
We can just call business logic and we're done,
or maybe not,
How do you ensure that endpoint is really exposed
on a certain URL?
How can you ensure that proper validation
has been performed?
And how can you prove that exceptions
in your applications are translated into right messages
and status code for the user?
As you can see,
there are plenty of other responsibilities
that are happening around the controller.
Let's review them and see how we can run
our integration tests against them
so we are more confident
that our application is properly covered with testing.
Here's an example of a simple RestController.
For each request,
the controller does the following.
First, listen to HTTP request,
response to certain URLs,
HTTP methods, and content types.
Two, deserialized input,
pass the incoming HTTP requests
and then create Java objects from variables in the URL,
HTTP requests parameters and request body.
Three, validate input.
Controller checks if input is not valid.
Four, call the business logic.
After Parsing the input transforms it into a business model
and parse it to a business logic.
Five, serialize the output takes the output
of a business logic and serialize it into HTTP response.
Six, translate exceptions.
When exception occurse controller will translate it
into HTTP status and error message for the user.
How are we going to write meaningful tests that cover all
of those responsibilities?
If you use the Unit Test.
We will test the controller in isolation by mocking away
any interactions with control dependencies
for example, calling the service layer
and at the end call controller methods
and verify the proper response
since the Unit Testing is not leveraging spring framework.
All of the stations and processing
which are happening behind the scenes of spring get ignored.
And our controller is no longer a controller,
but a plain cloth that involves the business logic.
As you can see,
a simple Unit Test will not cover responsibilities.
So we need to introduce spring to our tests
and integration tests with spring fires up
a spring application context
that contains all beans required for testing controller.
This includes beans responsible
for URL napping, serializing, and deserializing
to and from JSON and Java objects and translating exceptions
to proper HTTP message and status code.
These beans will evaluate the notations that would be
ignored by simple Unit Tests.
So, how can we do it?
with WebMvcTest and WebFluxTest Slices.
WebMvcTest loads components required
for testing Mvc parts of application.
WebMvcTest also auto configures MockMvc.
MockMvc offers a powerful way to quickly test
Mvc controllers without need to start a full HTTP server.
Web Slice will not cover testing service component
or repository beans?
So it is often used in combination
with MockBean to provide mock implementations
for required collaborators.
If you're coding reactive applications with WebFlux
there's also WebFluxTests
which also AutoConfigures WebTestClient
enabling testing Web Fluxe controllers
without the need to fire up HTTP server.
However, if you still feel you want to run a test
for the full application
you can always use Spring Boot Test.
Spring Boot Test will by default load
a Mock Web environment,
but it can also be configured to run
on a production environment.
You also have the power to use real dependencies.
But if you want, you can mock them out.
Just be careful not
to overuse Spring Boot Test notation.
Otherwise, you might end up with slow running tests
since full application context is started.